the Director of Life Sciences and Healthcare here at Posit.
Very excited to bring to you today
the ninth installment of our Life Sciences Series.
Previously, we have highlighted Roche, BMS,
Merck, GSK, Novartis, Johnson & Johnson, and others.
And you can find these Posit webinars linked below.
And today we have an exciting webinar
featuring the work of Novo Nordisk.
We're going to highlight the journey
to an R based FDA submission.
And we'll kick off the presentation today
with Ari, the Principal Statistical Programmer.
We'll then pass it over to Stephan, Statistician.
And then we'll end with Anders, Statistical Specialist.
It's such an exciting time for open source drug development.
From 2017 to 2020,
we had important things that had happened.
R and Pharma, the R validation hub, the Pharmaverse.
And then into 2021,
we had an R pilot submission to the FDA.
And now a little over a year later,
we have a full submission in R by Novo.
And it's so exciting to see the pharmas are migrating
to an open source backbone for their clinical reporting.
And what sets Novo apart is the depth
for which they're tackling this effort.
The change management from a multilingual
statistical computing environment
to the package management and validation
and to the end user support and education.
For example, they even have their own internal R podcast.
And all the while contributing to community efforts
like R and Pharma, the Pharmaverse, the pilot submissions.
And so it's with great joy to bring you this session today.
And now I will pass it over to Ari.
Thank you, Phil.
We're so excited to be here
and to be able to tell our story
of all the ups and downs we've experienced
in the past few years.
Before we begin, I just have to say that
this presentation represents the view of the office
and not necessarily New Orleans.
And any of the regulatory communication that we'll show here
will not be applicable to all projects.
So please communicate with the appropriate
health authorities about your submission.
Without further ado then, earlier this year,
we submitted our first R-based submission to FDA,
PMDA and other health authorities around the world.
And this happened early in 2023.
And we have multiple learnings and feedback
from authorities that we will share later on
in the presentation as well.
Incidentally, this year Novo Nordisk
is actually celebrating its 100th anniversary.
And Novo Nordisk started in 1923
as Nordic Insulin Laboratory.
And it was at a later merger with Novo Industry
that the current name Novo Nordisk was formed.
Here in Novo Nordisk, we focused on treatments
for people living with serious chronic diseases.
And we have a strong history in diabetes
and now in obesity for which you may know the company for.
In biostatistics where we three sit,
we work with the first three steps shown here.
So we work with the clinical trials,
data and evidence generation and approval activities.
In the evidence that we submit to authorities,
we include STDM and Adam datasets
that follow industry standards such as the CDISC.
We submit programs, documentation, analysis,
tables, figures, listings, you name it.
And what we're going to share today
is our story of getting to do all of this with R.
Now going back to the beginning,
then there's one thing we really, really want to highlight
and one thing that permeates everything
in this presentation.
And we put this quote on the slide,
that the goal is the transformation process
that is revolutionary in result,
but evolutionary in execution.
Or in other words, it's more a matter of taking steps
rather than thinking about how big those steps should be.
Now, back in 2015, we had a lot of people
Now back in 2015, we all joined the biostatistics
in Novo to an environment where everything was dominated
by the SAS programming language.
We loved R and we quickly noticed
a huge R shaped hole at Novo.
And to our surprise,
Gibbs and version control systems were also absent
and we were not the first to notice this here.
So we got R installed on our local computers
and we used it every now and then
for these one-off non-critical tasks.
In 2017, 2016, we started to introduce R to management
and our stakeholders and colleagues
for non-GXP related work,
where we were showcasing Shiny
as an incredible powerful framework
for data visualization
that you just couldn't get anywhere else.
We had a Shiny app for data exploration,
the bottom one you see here,
and one for assistance in pharmacokinetic
and pharmacodynamic data reviews.
We were also using R for crawling SAS logs,
comparing stuff and checking stuff.
And development of this continued through 2017.
And in 2018, we continued to push
for adopting some use of R.
And the collection of R programs we were using
had grown so much that we now combined it
into a single package named NNR.
And this package was the first thing
we put in version control
and we also set up pipelines for testing it.
Now, come 2019, where we finally saw a commitment
from above to report a trial in another language than SAS.
I remember receiving this strategy email
and Stephan was sitting at the desk right next to mine.
And I showed him this
and we literally ran into our manager and said,
if anybody's going to do this, it has to be us.
And it wouldn't take long
until we got the nod to go ahead for this.
And we both thought, shit, it's real.
How do we even do this?
We don't have a TXP environment for R.
We don't have a system for packages.
I mean, we don't even have a strategy for packages.
So we get down to this
and I'll hand it over to Stephan to tell you more.
Yes.
So at this point,
we are still using R from all local laptops
without any system basically at all.
So we were in dire need
of a statistical computing environment.
And actually our initial thoughts
regarding this new environment were in terms of stakeholders
and the change management of those.
So we wanted to produce table figures and listings
that were identical to those
that were already produced in SAS.
Because this mean that there would be no change
for the stakeholders regarding the language
that we would choose.
It would also mean that we could use the existing workflows
that we had set up for producing reports
that we're going to send to authorities.
And we could on the same trial work on both R and SAS.
We also wanted a system that were hassle-free
for the end user.
So we were trying to cater to our colleagues
that were used to programming SAS.
So we really wanted a server
that they didn't need to think so much about packages,
environment as such,
but more about getting to the actual programming.
So it should also be so that
if you've got a code snippet from your colleague,
you should be pretty sure
that that would also work on your computer,
given that you were using the same version of R.
And then finally, with this new SCE,
we really wanted to highlight version control.
So remember at this time,
we weren't using a version control basically at all.
We had a few things that we had it on,
but not for anything regarding trials.
So here we wanted to produce an easy way
for initiating a version control for both trial
and collaboration work, such as packages.
We quickly saw that these four things
would be the pillars of our infrastructure.
We really wanted an IDE based on RStudio workflow
or the opposite, Workbench,
because it was such a great IDE
and familiar to so many R users.
We did, however, want to make it the server-based solution
so that you would simply log in to the server
and be sure that you were in common ground
with everybody else.
Then we wanted to use Git for our version control
because that was so familiar with most of the R programmers
as we had used it in the past.
And it will also come with great features,
such as feature branching for our development stuff.
We wanted to use Azure DevOps,
both for project management, so for organizing tasks,
but also for all of the code repositories
that we could share those.
And of course, for CICD pipelines.
And finally, but definitely not least,
we wanted to use deposit package manager
for all things regarding R packages.
We wanted to use it to share our internal packages.
And we also wanted to use it for creating subset of packages
that we will call approved packages for use.
Now, when we started working on this SCE,
we were hit pretty hard
by the number of things you need to consider
for making a GXP compliant system.
I won't go through all of these now,
but suffice it to say that there is a lot to think about.
And so instead of starting from scratch,
we took a look at what do we already have.
I mean, at the time we were able to produce
all of the stuff that we needed
for the reports that were going to the authorities.
So instead of starting from scratch,
we wanted to piggyback on what we already had.
So we wanted to launch a computer
next to the one we already had.
Now, the one we already had
were located somewhere in Copenhagen,
having a file share with all of the data and output and such.
So we wanted to put it next to it,
except we didn't really want to put it next to it.
We wanted to put it in the cloud
because we had no idea
how many users were going to be on the system.
There'll probably be a few in the beginning
and then a lot as time progressed.
And luckily we got a really, really good cloud architect
to help us out on this.
And together we quickly saw
that in order to fill all of these GXP requirements,
we needed full infrastructure as code.
And we needed to have version control on that code
so that we could see who changed what and when.
We also, while I quickly identified
the need of machine images.
So for all of our compute instances,
they should be built on a machine image
so that we could spin it up
and be sure we would get the same result
the next time as we did before.
And finally, as we didn't want to do in a manual task,
we wanted to use release pipelines
for releasing the entire infrastructure
in different environments.
So in 2020, we released our first GXP
and classified environment for doing R stuff.
It would look something like this
where a user would come in from the workbench.
Here they would have access to the RStudio IDE.
They could program in R
and they would have access to all of the packages
they would need from the Posit package manager.
They could see all of their repositories
and get those from the Azure DevOps.
And they could install their code on a home directory,
which was a file share in the cloud.
Now we still had all of our data residing
on our old computer on the file share,
which were located somewhere in Copenhagen.
In terms of features,
we didn't do much the first couple of years,
but we did make a larger machines.
Then we make more workbench machines
and a load balancer in front.
Because of the growing need for computation
in regards to the users.
And then come 2022,
and we finally started to introduce new features.
We introduced Python on the workbench server
and PyPy on the Posit package manager.
We introduced new IDEs,
so that the programmer would be able to select the IDE
he or she was most comfortable with.
And we also introduced a lot of new features
that the IDE he or she was most comfortable with.
Then we introduced a caching system.
And this was because the file share located in Copenhagen
had an insanely slow connection to the cloud.
So this way we would only have to wait
for a dataset to be transferred once,
and then everybody else could use the data from the cache.
We also released a Posit Connect instance.
Mostly for sharing our markdown documents
and running Shiny applications.
Now this was built on the same image
as the workbench machine,
which meant that if it worked on the workbench machine,
it would almost certainly also work on the Connect instance.
But we did have one problem that was still remaining here.
And that were some users,
regardless of how big we tried to make
these workbench machine,
would hog up all of the resources that were available.
So in 2023, we finally released
a high performance compute cluster
in the type of a Kubernetes cluster,
where a user could spin up a Docker image.
And through that, they would get the entire IDE,
but they would be ensured
that they would not step on the toes of anybody else,
any of the other users.
And speaking of users,
let's just take a look at the user uptake on this system.
So here we have depicted the number of users
that we have on the Y-axis
and the timeline on the X-axis.
And we can see that we didn't have that many users
in the beginning as we expected.
These users were mainly those
that were assigned to the trials
that were going to produce results
that were going to use R for that.
But as you can see, the time grows,
we can see many, many, many more users.
And in the end,
we're actually not only supporting
the biostatistics department,
but also users from other departments within Nominoidisk.
And I thought we would have had such a great success
in the user uptake on the system,
if we didn't have a really great strategy
on handling packages.
And now, Anders will take us through
the handling of these packages from CRAN.
Yeah.
Thank you for that, Stephan.
So the NN package management really started in 2020
with the...
Sorry.
Remember that our organization was used to SAS and SAS only.
So introducing a new language
that is very much unlike SAS, that's challenging.
So SAS is nice and simple.
You need to install SAS 9.4.
It's 10 years old.
It has been patched a couple of times,
but it's still in use.
R on the other hand, that's not as simple.
R is evolving at a higher pace.
And R also has all of these packages.
And each of these packages,
they come with their own versions,
they come at different times,
they have their own life.
So these packages are what makes R great and powerful,
but there is no free lunch.
So dependencies between packages,
they quickly become too complex
if you just pick and choose your versions arbitrarily.
You need, you'll quickly create a set of packages
that does not work as intended together.
So we wanted to create an environment
that is sufficiently fixed and stable,
but still flexible.
And we opted for this shared baseline model
as it has now become known.
So here you lock each version of R
to a particular date and time,
and you install packages in versions
that were available at that given date.
So we do this so that we know
that any pair of dependent packages,
they were tested at that point in time,
and they were tested that they work together.
So that means that, for example,
our R version 4.02,
that's locked to some date in September, 2020,
that we will always get dplyr 1.0.2,
despite how many releases of dplyr that has been since.
So teams simply just choose their version of R.
They can deviate from the standard ones
that we have in the system,
but if they do so, they must use renv.
In general, we actually recommend that you always use renv.
So what packages can and should we use?
Well, they can be roughly categorized in this way.
So they are the base and recommended packages.
Those are the ones that ship with R.
They are low risk, and they are very widely used.
The contributed ones are the one
we need to do a risk assessment on.
So of these, there are the widely used ones.
They are low risk by virtue of the enormous user base.
There is the well-tested and documented ones.
They may be more niche,
but they are still considered low risk.
It is the risk that pose a problem.
So when we do a risk assessment,
we lean heavily on the R Validation Hub's
recommendations on how to categorize.
So the main points of categorization is the type of use,
the maintenance, the popularity, and so on.
So at the end of the day,
this is just a human risk assessment,
and the way we prompt this assessment to get made
is by a Shiny app.
So our users can, in the IDE via an add-in,
they will be able to select a requester app,
and that simply starts up.
So in the app, they can write what package they desire
and the reason for it,
and they can also see which R version
and version of the package this will be available in.
So when they submit this request,
it gets version controlled in Git and gets shipped.
That kicks off a pipeline and then risk metrics.
The risk metric page tests or performs risk metrics
for the package in each version of R that we have
and that associated library,
and in all of the environments that we have on the system.
Manual, sorry, a reviewer can then manually
inspect these results and arrive at an informed decision.
If the reviewer chooses to approve this,
then it will get fed to our system code
and then released upon the next release of that system.
So we now have a GXP environment
and we have a strategy for packages,
but we still do not have R code
for producing tables, figures, and listings.
We do not have batch execution and logging capabilities
in R, what about those?
This is also handled by the packages,
our internal packages,
and these internal packages,
they started as a single package,
one package to rule them all in 2018,
and this was developed on a local laptop,
and it was simply a gathering
of all the usual functions that have been made.
In 2020, we introduced the nnBiostat package
that was simply defined as the accepted packages.
So users would write library in nnBiostat
and get the most useful packages.
In 2021, we realized that nnR had become too big
and it was split into packages related to specific tasks.
So nnR then became just a simple umbrella
of all of these packages,
like you know from Tidyverse.
So the most important of our internal packages
is nnAccess, that is for getting data
without worrying about paths or data formats.
It's nnPlot for creating NovoStyle plots.
It's nnTable, which defines the grammar of tables
for laying out tables and creating text-based output.
So we wanted to mimic what we already did in SAS.
It can also produce HTML outputs.
We also have nnExport for exporting table figures
and lists that fit into our production pipeline.
And we have nnLog for batch execution and logging.
Here we actually use niraspin to create nice-looking logs.
So, and although these packages,
they fit together in a complicated network,
each package is just like in the real world,
it has its own repo.
It is managed in an open-source way internally.
And we have version numbers, a maintainer group,
we have pipelines, and we have boards
for managing bugs, features, ideas, and much more.
So we aimed to follow a common
and good software principles of modularity,
and we tried to build up functionality like Lego bricks.
So we tried to segregate the responsibility of the packages
and define appropriate extraction levels.
So at the bottom here,
you see the packages that are close to the system.
They are system-dependent, if you will.
And on top, you see the packages
that are close to the task at hand.
At the top, users shouldn't worry
about how the data is stored,
where is it stored, and so on.
They should just concentrate on the task.
So for example, a programmer wishes to use nntfl
to make a mean plot that will call nnAccess
to fetch ADAM data through a connection set up
by nnRemote.
And after the plot has been made,
nnExport will take care of exporting the data
to an appropriate data format
and associated files that we need.
So this has the benefit
that we can change underlying architectures in the system
and simply just do small changes
in the lower-level packages, if you will,
and the users won't see a difference.
So this is also the reason
that we could inject a caching system into the system.
So let's talk about the tool chain that we use in Novo.
So we use git for version control
and Azure Pipelines for executing code upon code changes.
We use useless for the description file and the news file.
We use package down for generating a website
of documentation,
and we use our oxygen to write the documentation.
We use lifecycle to convey the stability
or the lifecycle of a function within the packages.
And we use test.uncover to test the packages.
We also use our markdown
for writing longer format documentation
in the form of vignettes.
And we use DevTools to do the normal system,
sorry, the normal package development.
So upon a code change,
we will test again the package in a matrix way.
So we test against all our libraries,
all our versions of R
and across all of our system environments.
So we know that if, for example,
an upcoming change in development to the system
will break something in our packages.
We then build the package and then we release it.
So in the process of releasing,
we are updating the package down website
and we ship it to the internal repo in the package manager.
So we realized some time ago,
but we implemented it this year
that we need the ability to deprecate our versions.
So say we no longer want to support
the oldest version of R we have and stop,
then we have made version specific repos
so we can stop updating that.
This also allows for hotfixes if system changes are needed.
So we try to ensure a high level of code quality
by enforcing a main branch policy.
Nobody can change the main branch directly.
Only pull requests to the main branch are accepted.
The pipeline needs to run with success and no errors.
A feature or bot needs to be linked to the pull request
so we know why we have to change.
And we need at least one maintainer to approve
to ensure a code review.
So now we both have a system
and we both have the capabilities to execute R code.
And I think I'll hand it over to Stefan
so he can show you what it looks like in the real world.
Yes.
Thank you.
So I would like to show you how a script usually looks
when we do it in Noma Nordisk.
So all programs we have,
we'll start with the header as I'm showing you now.
This header will include a short description
of what the program is going to do.
So in this case,
we're going to derive summary statistics
for antibody levels grouped by treatment and gender.
We will have a very small outline
just indicating the most important steps of the program,
making it easier to read for another programmer.
Then the actual code will almost always start
with a call to library and then biostat.
This will ensure that we have the packages
that are most typically used in trial conduct
loaded into the system
and that they're loaded in the same order for every program.
And coming to the main part of the code,
we will almost always use NnAccess
because that's how we get access to the data.
We can call NnAccess on a specific trial
that will give us a trial access object.
A trial access object will have access
to all of the trial collections
that are supported for the selected trial.
In this case, that could be, for instance, ADAM or SDGM.
Here we're accessing ADAM data by calling db.adam
and then we can say what dataset we want to extract.
And notice here that we do not have any paths here.
That is taken care of by NnAccess.
And this means we can actually share this code snippet
without thinking about where it's actually executed.
It will always get the same dataset.
It also allowed us to inject this caching system
so that every time a user gets a dataset
that has already been loaded,
we'll simply use the cache and avoid long waiting time.
So when having the data,
we will usually use normal dplyr calculations
in order to derive the statistics that we want to use.
So for instance, here, we will filter the data.
We will summarize the statistics
that we want to put in the table.
And then we can, in this case, group them
by treatment, gender and the parameter code of interest.
This will give us all of the data points
that we would like to include in our table.
However, now we had this goal
that we wanted to produce tables
that were identical to those produced in SAS
so that we could be used in our usual pipelines
for producing reports to authorities.
However, we were using this text-based format
which has the tables that would span multiple pages
and we had no support for that in R.
So we created our own package in a table for doing that.
And here you can initiate a table rather easily.
You simply state what data is this table going to use
and then you can say what columns
are going to be in this table.
You can do some light formatting
saying that we would like mean and standard deviation
to be displayed as such,
or we would like minimum and maximum
to be displayed with a semicolon between.
This will produce a table looking like this,
but we wouldn't be quite happy yet.
Now, normally we would have all of the summary statistics
nested under each other.
So we would have to make the table a bit better,
but you can note that we have the display
that we wanted and we said that we wanted in the call.
In order to nest the summary statistics
underneath a new variable,
we use the functionality called addTransLong
where we can say we want these columns
nested under a new column called sum.
And we can also add some formatting, for instance,
to say how many decimals do we want to apply
for the different numbers.
That will produce a table like this,
which is a bit closer to what we usually have in our reports.
However, you can see the two new columns down the bottom,
the sum and the name column.
Now, we would usually have the sum column
nested under treatment and perhaps on the gender.
And the type of summary statistics,
which is the name column,
would go under the parameter code.
So we could use this by having these two
added lines of code where we have addTransLine
where we can say summary column
should be nested under treatment,
which again should be nested under gender.
Similar, we can add the stop of the table
saying we want a name nested under the parameter code.
That will produce a table like this,
which looks like something we've seen before
that we are going to do in Edna Monodisk.
We are able to produce other types of tables using this.
So we can export this via FlexTable
to, for instance, PowerPoint
or a Word document or directly to HTML.
But we are focusing today on what do we do
when we want to export it to a simple file.
And here we use the nnExport functionality
from the nnExport package.
Here we can simply say the output name
that we want to export
and a file name that we want to export it for.
Then it will figure out the rest.
And then we're actually done with a script
that can be used to produce such a table.
And in order to run it,
we will use a function called runScript
that comes from nnLog.
This function can take both R documents
and R Markdown documents,
and it can execute those in batch and in parallel.
And it will give you some sort of information
about how the execution actually went.
In this case,
we can see that the execution actually had an error.
So let's inspect that log.
As you can see here,
we get a nice HTML log,
and that log is produced via the spin functionality
from the NetApp package.
We can see that we have this header on the top
that just gives a short description
of how did the execution actually go.
Then we have the actual description
and the outline that we put in top of our document.
And we can see here they are nicely formatted.
After that comes all of the code chunks that we have.
We will also see all of the outputs in the log.
And in this case, we saw that we had an error.
It will also highlight both errors and warnings
so that they're very easy to see
as you scroll through the log.
And finally, in the end of these logs,
we always have an expanded session info.
Now, this session info will include
both session information about the packages
that we had in the session,
but also packages that were simply available at the system.
It will also include options
that were set in the environment
and other environment info.
But that is actually how we execute scripts
and how we do them in Nominoidisk in general.
But I'll hand it over to Anders.
And Anders will tell us a bit about
how we got our colleagues to actually do this.
Yeah, thank you.
Yeah, so once again,
the way we have primarily been doing our user support
and our education is to let everybody know
that there's help to be made.
So the help is here.
So we have primarily been supporting people
via a one-stop shop website
that collects all of these package down sites.
And recently we have introduced Stack Overflow for Teams
as a Q&A.
Until then, we have been using Microsoft Teams,
we have been using DevOps,
we have been using plain old mail to do this support.
In terms of education,
we have promoted self-learning and learning by doing.
This has been done through a podcast, as Phil mentioned.
And we have internal e-learning as well.
This is built on top of degree.com.
We also provide lots of external references
and e-learning to the outside world,
the ones you can find on the web.
We have done courses and demos
on how to get started with R and Novo,
but it's really the website
that has been doing the heavy lifting.
So the website looks like this,
and we call it the R.doc homepage.
You simply write R-doc in the browser
when you're on the corporate network
and you'll be taken to this.
So it's a one point of entry homepage for everything.
We have the motto that everything should be here.
If you cannot find it here, then it should be here
and we will make it.
So this site collects all the documentation
and references just mentioned.
It has the podcast, it has the Pakistan website.
It has vignettes, long format documentation.
It has an entire output catalog
so you can see how a program is structured.
It has lots of guides and more.
We also link further on to all of these e-learning
and education sites.
Something that you all know that is present in R,
this is not actually a given in other languages
where you can simply write help in the IDE
and get the documentation.
So we, of course, also convey this to our users.
And we really try to write high quality documentation
on our packages.
So you can get this right away.
We've also tried to do the equivalent of use this
in a package called nninit,
and this will help you get started
the first time you log in.
It will help you troubleshoot if you have any problems.
It will help you initialize and set up stuff,
trials, repos, new packages,
just in general, initiating stuff.
And we have also tried to integrate
and utilize all the RStudio features
with add-ins and snippets
to make them a nicer user experience.
The podcast is 10 to 15 minutes of how-to's
of everything from the complex to the very simple.
How do you get started?
How do you make your first output?
That sort of stuff.
And again, anybody can contribute here.
The one thing I want to highlight
is this Stack Overflow for Teams.
We have just recently rolled this out.
It's only a month old,
but we can tell already now
that it's going to be really good.
We have already 174 questions
and 255, sorry, not 55, 25 answers in there
and 65 daily active users.
So we really had no good place for Q&A,
and we wanted to avoid answering
the same questions again and again.
So this site really helps spread the support burden.
It helps build you a knowledge base,
and it's not just for code.
And this is also familiar to all programmers.
So there's no education for this needed.
So if we have any regrets in terms of change management,
it's just that we didn't get this out sooner.
So now I'll hand it back to Ari,
and he'll tell you about the submission.
Now, getting back to what I highlighted in the beginning,
we've always believed in the power of taking steps
rather than thinking about how big they should be.
And to put everything in ANOS and CIFN into perspective
and how you could do all of this
while doing a drop project,
we'll just look at a quick timeline
of the development here.
So in 2019, we got the commitment to report a trial
in another language than CES.
In the beginning of 2020,
we had collected functionalities into two R packages.
Soon after that,
we initiated the first R program on this trial,
chosen to be the first one reported
in another language than CES.
And we even did that
before we had the first workbench in production.
Unfortunately, the trial got delayed,
but we were determined to prove
that we could use R in our deliverables.
And we did an experiment with learning a DSUR instead.
Later on in 2020, we split up the functionalities
and created packages and package shelf
of everything that was to come.
And we were working on the documentation
and released the RDoC homepage in the end of 2020.
And from doing this DSUR,
we just learned an incredible amount of stuff
during our first deliverables.
So we updated a lot of core functionalities
and the packages.
We update the workbench once more
with load balancing and multiple servers.
Soon after that,
I managed to convince our management
that we're now ready to run phase three trials in R,
and we do the first commits on these trials.
Immediately after that,
we follow up with five clinical pharmacology trials.
And finally, right before Christmas in the end of 2021,
we report our first trial ever in another language than SAS.
And between 2022 and 2023,
we just have an incredible amounts of first happening.
And we also update the workbench once more
because we're sending so much data in and out of it now
that it crashes when we run these big add-on programs.
So what we end up with is a huge package
of R-based GFL programs and some add-on programs in R.
But basically after we proved in the end of 2020
that it was possible to deliver a DSUR
that followed basically all the same processes internally
as we do for clinical trials,
we were using R in all project deliverables
from that point on.
One thing to note is that we initially did not intend
to submit all of those R-TFL programs.
If we look at FDA guidance,
then our plan was to submit all of our add-on programs,
including those made in R,
and then having those R-TFL programs internally
and instead submit our SAS parallel programs
for our primary and secondary efficacy analysis,
which is something that we had done in projects before.
And that leaves us with this gray area
that we were still creating a strategy for.
I'll get back to this in just a second.
The add-on R programs that we submitted,
they were designed with minimal dependencies
on internal packages,
as we weren't sure how to best submit packages
at this point in time.
We did use our internal package in an access
for getting access to data,
but we didn't plan on submitting it
just as we didn't submit SAS-based macros
that only work internally.
We did still think that we needed to tell authorities
about abuse of R.
So you can see here an excerpt from a type C meeting package
where we mentioned that we plan on submitting R programs
and we will specify R-related stuff in the ADHE
and submit internal packages
if they are not publicly available.
In our pre-BLA meeting package,
we get more specific and we mentioned
that we intend to use the R package, package light,
which packages R packages to TXT
in order to pass them through the submission gateway
at the FDA.
And this initial approach is the method used
by the R Consortium Working Group R for Submission
in their first pilot submission to FDA.
We also mirror their approach in the ADHE
where we add something about R in the standard section
and we add an additional very short appendix
on what you would need in order to run the other programs.
So with this, we bundle everything together
and we submit our first multilingual submission package
to FDA.
But there's still this gray area that we need to tackle
because we know that PMDA has already made
pre-submission requests for additional TFL programs.
And we know that it's not unusual for FDA
or other health authorities
to ask for additional programs.
And lo and behold, it doesn't take long
until we receive this.
An information request from FDA stating,
to facilitate the efficiency of the safety review,
submit all programming codes used to create
the tables and figures in the ISS
and the safety sections of the CSRs.
And now we're thinking, Chip, it's real.
We really need to figure this out
and we only have 10 days to do it.
You can imagine the stressed looks on our faces
and a lot of deep breaths that need to be taken
at this point in time.
But after we have calmed ourselves down a bit,
we get to it.
So we knew all trials have been executed
with the RENV setup.
So we could use the RENV log files to look up versions
of all of the internal packages.
We then use PackageLite to take the package sources
and repackage them all into a single PackageLite file
for each trial.
In the submission, we now included the PackageLite file,
the RENV log file package to text
and modify to use MRAN for public packages.
We include RENV's activate script that bootstraps RENV.
And then a script that would unpack source packages,
set up a seller for RENV, rebuild the packages
and initialize an R project with the RENV setup
and within a dedicated folder structure
such that all of the internal Novo packages could run.
In the ADHE, we update the appendix
to include some information on these new files
that we're submitting and which commands were needed
to restore the environment and how you could modify
the NN access function in order to make it run
in a local R project.
So we bundle all of this together
and ship a whole bunch of R-based TFL programs
together with the R packages
and these additional files to the FDA.
And again, I mean, at this point in time,
we're on top of the world.
I mean, we did it.
Now we also submitted packages
and even within this deadline.
But FDA returns again and they can't get it to work.
And now we're really thinking, shit.
And together with that message,
they also include the following in the information request.
Submit R code for all safety analysis
with as minimal package dependency as possible
and no dependencies to R packages developed internally
by Novo Nordisk.
And now we're really thinking, shit.
At this point in time, we're doubting
if we can get it to work.
At this point in time,
we're doubting everything that you heard
up until now in this presentation.
The package strategy, the submission strategy,
the future of R at Novo Nordisk.
We poured so much energy into making this a reality
and now we're at this pivotal moment
where we make it or we break it.
They can't restart the environment
and they want us to reprogram all the programs.
So what do we do?
We do something we very, very rarely do.
We invite FDA for an informal meeting.
In the meantime, we go back looking at our build script
and optimize it once more.
We also optimize the R and V log file
to use Posit's public package manager
as at this point in time, MRAN has now shut down.
We write a very long and very detailed instruction
with screenshots of everything that's happening
and what you should expect to see
when you're restoring the environment,
when you're executing different parts of the scripts.
And we ship this off to FDA before the meeting,
hoping that we now have done it right.
Now this meeting happened quite recently
and minutes before the meeting, we are quite nervous.
Like what are they gonna say?
Are we going to be grilled?
And the meeting starts and it turns out
they now have been successful in restoring the environment.
And we were just thinking, yes.
And they bring up the programs and mentioned
that part of the reason for them asking
is that it gives FDA an opportunity
to see how code inside and outside of packages are built.
And this would be a great learning opportunity for FDA.
The statistical revenues in the meeting with FDA
are just so super nice.
And we realized one very important thing from this meeting.
Submissions in R is new to us,
but it's definitely new to FDA as well.
And this brings us to the future
where we have three main points
that we wanna dive deeper into.
We wanna have a stronger R dedication.
We want improvements to recreating environments
outside of the in-and-outs.
And we wanna fully embrace the open source.
As part of the R dedication,
we have multiple fully R-based projects already started
and now also dedicated teams to support our package
and system development.
We have learned some very valuable environment lessons
around the rebuilding across operating systems.
And the fact that the official package manager
stored binaries of packages
was really invaluable in this submission
as we didn't need to compile from a source
on Windows machines.
And we already have many ideas
for how we can work tests around this into our workflows
and also guide colleagues and peers
for regulatory interaction.
And last but not least, fully embrace open source.
The cleanup of all of our internal packages will start soon
and we will move towards open development on GitHub.
We will rebuild a lot of our core functionalities
such that it will work for the broader programming community
and aim to get our packages onto CRAN
and dive much deeper into FarmReverse.
Before we end, I really wanna acknowledge
all the package contributors and system contributors
that we have, the programmers and statisticians
that fought to learn R on these trials
throughout a very hectic time,
the invaluable input and knowledge coming from our peers
at other companies working with our working groups
under our consortium, the R validation hub
and all the efforts going into making
something like this possible.
We would also like to acknowledge the fact
that FDA agreed to meet with us
and advertise in the end of the day.
It's also just nice, normal people working at FDA.
They are much more open and welcoming of R
than we anticipated.
And we encourage that you reach out just as we did.
So thank you so much for listening to our presentation.
Awesome.
Thank you, Novo team.
That was fantastic.
Gosh, what a aid this is gonna be
for other pharmas going down this path.
We have more questions than I think we have time for.
So we're gonna tackle a few of them.
And they also came in at different times
before you had got to that point later on
in the presentation.
So if you think we've already tackled it,
just let me know.
But I'm gonna go based off of popularity
and we've got 30 plus questions.
So let's tackle a few of them.
And so let's start off with this first one.
How can we ensure that R code,
including internal R packages is responsible,
is reproducible on a reviewer's machine,
such as that of the FDA?
That is a very good question.
Would you take it Stan?
Yes, so that is a good question.
And of course we cannot completely ensure it.
What we can ensure is that we can reproduce the environment
such that they have the same packages available,
the same version of R available,
that they, in that way we can make sure
that they have data in the places
we would like them to have data in.
And that way use our programs.
And that was what we did in the scripts
that we sent to them now,
was to actually from the file that we have submitted
in this M5 folder structure,
make it possible to recreate the entire folder structure
that we normally work upon,
and then reuse the in an access facility
and in a biostat functionality
to ensure that the packages that they have loaded
is the same as what we are seeing.
And thereby be very close to a fact
that they will get the same result as us,
as close as we can get.
Fantastic.
Anybody else on the NOVA team want to mention, comment?
No, I think that's sufficient.
Yeah, I think that's enough.
All right, so let's go to another question here.
So the next question says,
how long before it becomes a common practice in NOVA
to use R for trial related programming?
So I think, well, so I mean,
I think doing this one drug project at first
has really kind of kicked off
like an internal revolution for doing this
because we proved that it was possible to do it.
It's been hard and difficult
and there's a lot of change management involved,
but the benefits we've seen from this,
like reusing TFL objects into result meeting slides,
like all the benefits we get
from doing HTML based stuff now
is just spilling over into other projects.
I think probably we're closing in
on maybe 30, 40% of the trials now are starting up in R.
And we have, I think 115 trials ongoing currently.
So the uptake is quite big.
Fantastic.
Any other comments?
Let's jump to the next one.
All right, so the next one is about
the scope of the undertaking.
How many personnel are needed to maintain
the complexity of this environment?
Will you take that, Stefan?
Yeah, so that's a hard question also
because at NOVA we noticed this
has really been a bottom up adventure
where we saw from the top
that we would like us to make this report
or trial in another language than R.
And then we were pretty much allowed to run with it.
So we've been a few people working on the packages.
I would guess six that would do usual commits.
We have been mainly three
to work on the statistical computing environment.
In terms of the actual development of it,
we had way more in terms of getting it GXP validated
because that's just a much, much bigger adventure.
But in terms of active development.
And then how many for actual trial conduct?
I mean, there's been a very steep learning curve
on the trial.
So I would say there's anything between
30, 40, 50 programmers and statisticians
that have been running all of these trials,
creating R programs.
I must say all the trials have been running in parallel,
which has also made the workload quite a lot bigger.
But a lot of people have been involved
in doing actual trial conduct.
Yeah.
And one thing I think we need to add
is also that as we do it internally open source,
lots of people step up and contribute.
The podcast, for example, is somebody came up with that
and we said, go with it.
Let's put it on this RDocs thing.
The same with this DeGreed.
Another guy came up with that.
And so we just grabbed those balls
and we really try to encourage our users
and our friends to do that sort of thing.
So it's hard to put in terms of FTEs
because we can't, we don't know actually.
And on that point, that's what's been a learning
for us who have been developing the packages first
to actually start to let go
and let the community be the main drivers.
So for instance, for this table package that we have,
we're getting more and more contributors around the company
for features that they would like it to include.
And also feature requests, of course,
that's why can't I use the DT package directly from this?
So we will of course start to implement that
so that it has full support for that as well.
Interesting.
So I've got a couple more questions.
So I'm gonna go a little bit faster on these
because we've got a lot of people still on.
So let's keep going.
So this next one said,
what can you clarify by what you mean
by first R-based submission?
It says, are all the programs in code were in R?
Yeah, so all of the tables, figures and listings
that we've made have all been in R.
So at Novo, we have been using a data set
for analysis results for quite some time,
meaning that the statistical analysis
are still done in SAS, put into a huge data set
and then reported through our TFL programs.
So statistical analysis are still onto the side,
onto and into SAS,
but everything else in regards to TFL
have been developed in R.
And then as well, we have some of these
R-based atom programs,
which have primarily been for the data set
where we just need the additional compute power
that we can get from being in the cloud
because they have been extremely huge.
Awesome, another question.
What were the business benefits of an R solution
relative to commercials or for example, SAS?
That's a good question.
I guess, so like Stefan said, this spills over
or I believe it's UI.
It spills over in all sorts of other things.
So when we do presentation slides or we do other stuff,
it's much more easy to pick up
and do something more powerful with these shiny apps
and so on.
They also can utilize the packages
so we can kind of, again, build up functionality.
So it really spills over,
but again, it's impossible to say,
like in terms of money, how much again it is,
but we see it kind of starting to permeate
into other non-GXP tasks and other stuff that we do.
And one other very important aspect
from the business side has been
how do we get more employees involved in biostatistics?
Because we are doing more and more trials,
so we need more and more employees.
And here we have seen that there are just so many more
people we can get who know R
than there are actually people coming out who know SAS.
So from a business benefits,
I would say one of the highest values
is getting new employees and getting them up to speed fast.
Definitely.
So you just mentioned research and other areas.
And for the late stage here, a question that comes up,
I think a lot of people are wondering about
is do you plan to use Python in a submission too?
And does your scientific
or statistical computing environment support Python
and R development and apps?
Yeah.
We have Python on the system.
It is an experimental feature, if you will.
So, and as far as I know,
we don't have any plans for doing Python-based submissions,
but we feel that there is a pressure.
So the users or some users really want that as well.
So now we are trying to come up with similar strategies
for handling Python so that,
so you can really have a true multilingual system.
But we have seen, we have started the process,
but it is a bit harder with Python than R
because we don't have CRAN,
where we have a much, much better control.
And we know that the packages are tested together.
So we can have this nice strategy
for how we put the packages in,
where we know that these packages
are going to function together.
That doesn't really apply to Python.
So that is at least the problem
that we are tackling right now in order to do it.
Awesome.
How about one more question here?
How often do you update your different R environments?
Yeah, so we've been doing,
I guess if we even them out,
it would be like a half yearly update.
But it has depended on how big are the features
that we're working on.
Quite recently, we had a large gap between them
because we were working on this Kubernetes cluster.
So that was sort of a big thing.
We needed to develop the Kubernetes cluster
and also get it DXP approved
before we could release it to the broader community.
So there we had, I think, almost a year.
But usually it would be about every half yearly.
And then we have a commitment,
both in terms of user request,
but also for ourself,
that we really want to go down to every second month
to have updates of the system
so that new packages can get to users
much, much faster than they do now.
And also, I mean, if we're diving more into
open source, where the release cycle,
at least from the stuff we see in farmer versus
is quite fast, like we need to be up to speed
if we want to include like the latest updates
into our trials as well.
So we really want to get the release cycle down.
Exactly.
But one thing though,
even though we have a rather strict package management
strategy, we have made it so that all users
can actually, if they work a little bit for it, not much,
but just change the repository,
the options repost argument,
then they can lock themselves into a newer version
of the packages and start working from there.
So it is possible.
And we do have some projects that are starting to do that
if they feel that the system has fallen a bit too much
behind that we need to work with the newer packages
available, and we need to make sure that
the new package is available,
then we have shown them, okay,
how can you do that yourself and still ensure
that you are compliant?
So my team just mentioned that we still have a lot
of people on.
So if you have some time, let's keep going.
What the heck, right?
The questions keep flooding in.
How about this one?
I like this.
So for your next R-based submission,
what are some things you might do differently
that jump out to you?
I think one thing is, I mean,
we realized now that a statistical reviewer at FDA
or another health authorities might not have adequate time
to kind of get acquainted with a whole set of packages
that's being submitted.
Meaning that if you're building like super smart
functionality in a lot of packages and they all like
really work well together, getting that kind of thrown
in the face as a reviewer might be too much
and you wouldn't have time to dive deeper into it.
So we're thinking of a lot of ways of how do we expose
like the derivations, the calculations,
the analysis that we're doing in programs,
either through like better logs or kind of surfacing
more of like the deep based derivations that we're doing.
And then, I mean, we want to do a submission
with the Admiral as well.
We want to use more of these farm roast packages in them.
And definitely, as I mentioned here,
testing in a Windows-based operating system
is something we will definitely be building
into kind of our submission pipeline
that it is something that just needs to work.
So, yeah.
Fantastic.
All right.
How about two more and then I officially
will end the webinar for today.
So how about given the significant overlap
between the responsibilities and functions of IT
and Biostats, how was collaboration
between these two sectors?
Facilitated?
Definitely.
Yes.
And there is actually a good example of this.
We, at the very first time, the IT development
sort of developed an R server
without so much response from Biostatistics.
And in that server, we said, you can go here
and you can start programming.
We said, you can go here and you can start programming.
And the first thing I tried was,
okay, so I want to install Tidyverse
so that I could get going.
That won't work here.
We don't have all of these things installed in the system
so that you can actually do that.
And okay.
So I can't even use Tidyverse.
This is going to be a steep climb
if we're going to use Base R for everything.
So from that day,
we started a really, really close collaboration
because we sort of saw the need
that even though you know everything about IT,
you might not know all the needs
that there are for an R-based system.
So from there, we would have both R developers
and IT developers working closely together,
ensuring that we would have the best system possible
for the end user.
Yeah.
Okay, last question.
This is it, I promise.
How about, you know, one thing we hear a lot
about are other regulatory agencies
besides the FDA for submissions.
So someone says, can you share about your experience
with R submissions outside of the FDA,
EMA, PMDA, et cetera?
Yeah, so I really want to bring up an example
from the R Consortium working group, R for Submission,
where we also tried to reach out to PMDA
through some of our peers
in the Japanese Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Association,
JPMA.
And the message we got back from PMDA
was that they didn't feel a need for a pilot submission
because they already accepted our submissions.
And what we have still included
in our correspondences with the PMDA, for instance,
that we're using R for different stuff,
we're giving them flow charts of stuff.
And with PMDA, we even suggested
that we would submit RDS files instead of XPT files,
just because we had these huge datasets
that were more than 250 gigabytes in XPT,
which I think any local laptop
would be difficult to open those up.
And they've been very open.
And I would say from all the health authorities
that we have talked with,
none of them are questioning the use of R.
They are still coming with the same scientific questions
about the submission.
Of course, here we got some technical questions
about restoring the environment,
but it was because they wanted to make it work.
So only positive things, I would say.
Well, fantastic.
Thank you again.
I think this has been one heck of a webinar
and the community is gonna really enjoy
watching this afterwards.
I suspect we also can tackle some of these other questions
maybe in a blog post.
So thank you so much, Ari, Steph, and Anders.
Truly wonderful to hear about your experience,
the journey you went down,
and the collaboration with the community
and internally has been fantastic.
So with that, we do thank you one last time
and thank you to the community
that's turned out for the webinar today.
And stay tuned.
We'll be posting this online here soon
for those of you that may have missed some parts.
And hopefully we see you at R and Pharma
coming up in October.
And with that, we'll bid everybody farewell
and have a wonderful afternoon.
Thank you, everybody.